larry daly is a brooklyn divorcee whose
unstable work history causes his former
wife erica to believe that he is a bad
example to their ten-year-old son nick
and larry fears that nick respects his
future stepfather
don more than him cecil fredericks
an elderly security guard about to
retire from the american museum of
natural history
hires larry despite his unpromising
resume
the museum which is rapidly losing money
plans to replace cecil and his two
colleagues gus and reginald with one
guard
cecil gives larry an instruction booklet
on how to handle museum security
advises larry to leave some of the
lights on and warns him not to let
anything in
or out once night falls larry discovers
that the exhibits come
to life including a playful
tyrannosaurus skeleton nicknamed rexy
who behaves like a dog
a mischievous capuchin monkey named
dexter rival miniature civilizations led
by old west cowboy jedediah and roman
general octavius
abusive lim ripping adela the hun an
easter island moa obsessed with chewing
gum
and a wax model of theodore roosevelt
roosevelt explains that since an ancient
egyptian artifact the golden tablet of
pharaoh at manra came to the museum in
all of the exhibits come to life each
night if the exhibits are outside the
museum during sunrise
they turn to dust roosevelt helps larry
by restoring order
but only for one night larry quits the
next morning
not wanting a life-threatening job
however
when nick comes to see him at work and
expresses interest in his job
larry remains as a night guard when
larry tells cecil that dexter tore up
his instructions
cecil advises him to study history he
also learns more from museum docent
rebecca hutman
who is writing a dissertation on
sacagawea but does not feel she knows
enough about her subject
the next night larry uses what he has
learned to better control the exhibits
but four neanderthals set fire to a
display
one of the neanderthals turns into dust
after escaping
the next morning museum director dr
mcphee almost fires larry after what had
happened to the neanderthal exhibit
until larry begs him to reconsider
larry offers rebecca a meeting with
sacagawea but she believes that he is
mocking her and the museum
larry brings nick to the museum to show
him the exhibits but none of them come
to life
they find cecil gus and reginald
stealing the tablet and other valuable
objects
like the exhibits the guards receive
enhanced vitality from the artifact and
plan to frame larry for the thefts
they have also disabled the tablet to
stop the exhibits from interfering
with his father's encouragement nick
reactivates the tablet and runs away
with the artifact
after a chase throughout the museum
cecil locks up nick and his father in
the egyptian room and steals back the
tablet
larry releases igmenra's mummy from his
sarcophagus
the pharaoh speaks english from many
years as an exhibit at cambridge and
helps larry and nick escape
the three find the other exhibits
fighting after helping adela deal with
past trauma causing him to act out
larry convinces the exhibits to work
together
the exhibits capture gus and reginald
without difficulty
but cecil escapes by stagecoach he
almost runs sacajawea over
but instead slices teddy in half when he
shoves her out of the way
larry nick akmenra jed octavius
rexy and attila the hun pursue cecil to
central park
where they stop him and regain the
tablet jet and octavius crash their
remote controlled hummer but survive
teddy is fixed by sacagawea with warm
wax
rebecca sees the exhibits return to the
museum before sunrise and realizes that
larry was telling the truth
he introduces her to sacagawea mcphee
almost fires larry again
after seeing news reports of the strange
events around the museum such as cave
paintings in the museum subway station
dinosaur footprints in central park and
caveman sightings
however upon seeing how much these
events raised attendance
he reconsiders larry nick and the
exhibit celebrate the following night
during the credits cecil gus and
reginald are now working as janitors at
the museum